Device redundancy best practices (#9239)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/user-guide/core-data-model/dcim/deviceredundancygroup.md

Device Redundancy Groups represent logical relationships between multiple devices. Typically, a redundancy group could represent a failover pair, failover group, or a load sharing cluster.
Device Redundancy Groups are created first, before the devices are assigned to the group.

A failover strategy represents the intended operation mode of the group. Supported failover strategies are:

- Active/Active
- Active/Passive

Secrets groups could be used to store secret information used by failover or a cluster of devices.

> Device Redundancy Group Priority is a Device attribute set when assigning a Device to a Device Redundancy Group. This field represents the priority the device has in the device redundancy group.

Reviewer: This information now seems redundant with the more detailed info in the fields table in the Overview section below.

Author: These are the high level overview and most important things, I am good as is.

## Overview

Choosing between this and a [Virtual Chassis](virtualchassis.md) comes down to the management control plane count — use a Device Redundancy Group when each member keeps its **own** control plane, and a Virtual Chassis when they share **one**. See [HA Devices](hadevice.md) for the full comparison.

Use a Device Redundancy Group when multiple physical devices work together to provide high availability while each keeps its **own control plane and management IP**, such as a firewall HA pair, a vPC/MLAG pair, or a load balancer cluster. The model is small: a single `DeviceRedundancyGroup` object that member devices point to, with each member optionally recording a priority within the group to convey failover order (e.g. primary vs. secondary). The group itself carries the failover strategy (active/active or active/passive), a status, and optionally a Secrets Group for credentials shared across the members.

!!! note

>     Unlike a Virtual Chassis, there is no master concept and interfaces are never surfaced on a peer device. Each member remains a fully independent device in Nautobot — with its own interfaces, inventory, configuration, and primary IP — reflecting that each unit is managed on its own. Which unit is "primary" is conveyed by `device_redundancy_group_priority`, but Nautobot only stores this integer — it does not elect a primary or define whether higher or lower wins. Your automation assigns the meaning, so pick a convention and document it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Unlike a Virtual Chassis, there is no "master" concept and interfaces are never surfaced on a peer device. Each member remains a fully independent device in Nautobot — with its own interfaces, inventory, configuration, and primary IP — reflecting that each unit is managed on its own. Which unit is "primary" is conveyed by `device_redundancy_group_priority`, but Nautobot only stores this integer — it does not elect a primary or define whether higher or lower wins. Your automation assigns the meaning, so pick a convention and document it.
```

> LAG interfaces cannot span members of a Device Redundancy Group; a LAG and its member interfaces must belong to the same device (or the same virtual chassis). For multi-chassis technologies such as vPC or MLAG, model a port channel on each member individually and give it the same name on both members (e.g. `Port-Channel10` on each switch), matching how the technology is typically configured. The pairing is deliberately a naming convention: nothing in the data model links the two port channels, nothing enforces that the names match, and no configuration is synced. Conventions also carry the identifiers config templates need, the per-port-channel vPC/MLAG number is derived from the port channel name (e.g. `Port-Channel10` → `vpc 10`), and the pair-scoped domain ID is recorded in a [config context](../extras/configcontext.md) assigned to the device redundancy group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LAG interfaces, in Nautobot's data model, cannot span members of a Device Redundancy Group, as a LAG and its member interfaces must all belong to the same Device (or the same Virtual Chassis). For multi-chassis technologies such as vPC or MLAG, model a port channel on each member individually and give it the same name on both members (e.g. `Port-Channel10` on each switch), matching how the technology is typically configured.

The pairing is only by naming convention: nothing in the data model links the two port channels, nothing enforces that the names match, and no configuration is synced. Conventions also carry the identifiers config templates need: the per-port-channel vPC/MLAG number is derived from the port channel name (e.g. `Port-Channel10` → `vpc 10`), and the pair-scoped domain ID is recorded in a [config context](../extras/configcontext.md) assigned to the device redundancy group.
```

> If you need an explicit link between the two port channels instead of a convention — for example, when the names cannot be kept identical — create a custom [Relationship](../../platform-functionality/relationship.md) (e.g. "vPC peer", Interface ↔ Interface) and query it alongside the rest of the data. An [Interface Redundancy Group](interfaceredundancygroup.md) can technically group any redundant interfaces, but it was designed for first hop redundancy protocols — a shared `virtual_ip`, an FHRP `protocol`, election priorities — so we do not recommend it for pairing multi-chassis port channels. It remains the right model when those semantics genuinely apply, such as the floating IPs shared by a load balancer pair shown later on this page.

Reviewer: Feels like these two paragraphs would flow more intuitively if presented *below* the tables just below, instead of above them? Also, might be a good place for a subheading, like `### Modeling LAG across a Device Redundancy Group`?

|---|---|---|---|
| `name` | String | Yes | Unique name identifying the redundancy group |
| `status` | Status | Yes | Lifecycle status of the group (e.g., Planned, Active, Decommissioning) |
| `description` | String | No | Brief human-readable description of the group's purpose |
| `failover_strategy` | Choice | No | How traffic is handled across members: `Active/Active` (both units process traffic simultaneously) or `Active/Passive` (one unit is standby until failover occurs) |
| `comments` | Text | No | Free-form notes about the group |
| `secrets_group` | FK → SecretsGroup | No | Credentials used to access devices in this group (e.g., shared enable password) |

The following fields are on the `Device` model, in support of the Device Redundancy Group feature set.

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `device_redundancy_group` | FK → DeviceRedundancyGroup | No | The redundancy group this device belongs to |
| `device_redundancy_group_priority` | Integer (≥ 1) | No | Priority of this device within the group |

## Entity Relationship Diagram

This schema illustrates the connections between the models involved in a device redundancy group.

> ```mermaid

Reviewer: Anything we can do to make this diagram "enlargeable"? On my monitor the text is too small to read comfortably.

Author: My understanding is no, we can't control that, I have seen similar in others.

    }

    InterfaceRedundancyGroup {
        string name UK
        Status status FK
        string protocol "HSRP, VRRP, GLBP, CARP, or blank for other groupings"
        string protocol_group_id "e.g. HSRP or VRRP group ID"
        IPAddress virtual_ip FK "optional shared virtual address"
        SecretsGroup secrets_group FK "optional"
    }

    InterfaceRedundancyGroupAssociation {
        InterfaceRedundancyGroup interface_redundancy_group FK
        Interface interface FK
        int priority "required per member"
    }

    SecretsGroup {
        string name UK
    }

    DeviceRedundancyGroup |o--o{ Device : "members (device_redundancy_group + priority)"
    DeviceRedundancyGroup }o--o| SecretsGroup : "shared credentials"
    DeviceRedundancyGroup |o--o{ Controller : "controller deployed on group"
    Device ||--o{ Interface : "has (each member keeps its own)"
    Interface }o--o| Interface : "LAG membership (lag)"
    InterfaceRedundancyGroup ||--o{ InterfaceRedundancyGroupAssociation : "has"
    Interface ||--o{ InterfaceRedundancyGroupAssociation : "member (with priority)"
    InterfaceRedundancyGroup }o--o| SecretsGroup : "protocol secrets"
```

## Sample API

> The below Python snippet is intended to work by dropping it into an IPython shell or file. It leverages the public demo sandbox. In addition, you can update the first set of variables to more easily integrate with other systems.

Reviewer: More context/explanation here would be helpful as this is a large chunk of code to understand by reading alone. I *think* the below code is creating some DRGs and IRGs, but it's not clear to me why it's doing so or what the end goal is.

            if member.lag is None:
                member.update({"lag": po10.id})

    print("Seeding floating IP interface redundancy groups...")
    for vip_name, vip_address in VIP_INTERFACES.items():
        virtual_ip, created = get_or_create(
            nb.ipam.ip_addresses, {"address": vip_address, "namespace": namespace.id}, {"status": active.id}
        )
        log(created, "IPAddress", str(virtual_ip.address))

        vip_irg, created = get_or_create(
            nb.dcim.interface_redundancy_groups,
            {"name": f"{DRG_NAME}-{vip_name}"},
            {"status": active.id, "virtual_ip": virtual_ip.id},
        )
        log(created, "InterfaceRedundancyGroup", vip_irg.name)

        for spec in DEVICES:
            _, created = get_or_create(
                nb.dcim.interface_redundancy_group_associations,
                {"interface_redundancy_group": vip_irg.id, "interface": vip_interface_ids[(spec["name"], vip_name)]},
                {"priority": spec["priority"]},
            )
            log(created, "IRG association", f"{spec['name']} {vip_name} (priority {spec['priority']})")

    ```

## Sample Design Builder

> The following [Design Builder](https://docs.nautobot.com/projects/design-builder/en/latest/) example models the same HA pair as the Sample API above: `jcy-drg01` and `jcy-drg02` tied together by a `DeviceRedundancyGroup` named `jcy-drg01:02`, sharing the same `JCY` location and `192.168.1.0/24` management prefix.

Reviewer: Now this is information that it would have been helpful to have above!

Would it make sense to have a diagram showing the network topology/configuration that these samples are representing into Nautobot?

??? example "Show Design Builder YAML"

>     ```jinja2

Reviewer: Should this be `yaml` rather than `jinja2`? Doesn't appear syntax-highlighted correctly on ReadTheDocs.

    The same data is reachable starting from a member device (e.g. `query { devices(name: ["jcy-drg01"]) { device_redundancy_group { devices { ... } } } }`) when a hostname is what you have in hand.

## Key Characteristics

- **Can you port channel across multiple devices?** No — model a port channel on each member individually and pair them by giving both the same name; add a custom Relationship only if you need an explicit link.
- **Can you see all interfaces on the Primary?** No — the active unit only shows its own interfaces
- **Can you see all interfaces on the Backup?** No — the standby unit has its own separate interface list
- **On Primary, can you tell which interfaces are assigned to which device?** N/A — each device is modeled separately in Nautobot
- **When do you see all the interfaces on the primary device?** You do not, each device always shows only its own interfaces
- **Can you connect interfaces from primary to non-primary?** The failover and stateful link interfaces connect the two units either directly or via a switch
- **What should the naming standard be for the HA pair?** A combination of the two devices names (e.g., `ASA01:02` for `ASA01` and `ASA02`)

> - **Should I use interface named templates?** Yes

Reviewer: What is an `interface named template`?

- Given a redundancy group, I would like to know its pair-scoped identifiers such as the vPC/MLAG domain ID (via the config context assigned to the group).
- Given a member device, I would like to know the floating (virtual) IPs it shares with its peer (via its interfaces' interface redundancy groups).
- Given a controller, I would like to know whether it is deployed on a device redundancy group rather than a single device.

!!! tip
    You can answer all of these questions with the prior defined GraphQL query.

## Configuration Generation

=== "Multi-chassis L2 Pair"

    Operating systems and technologies include VPC / MLAG (Cisco vPC, Arista MLAG, and Juniper MC-LAG variants).

    A config template driven by the GraphQL response above. Each device renders its vPC domain (from the `vpc_domain_id` key in its config context, assigned via the device redundancy group), a peer-keepalive between the two members' management IPs, and each vPC port channel with its member interfaces. The per-port-channel vPC number is derived from the port channel name by convention (`Port-Channel10` → `vpc 10`).

>     ```jinja2

Reviewer: Not seeing any syntax highlighting on readthedocs for this. Probably need to add `jinja2` to the `hljs_languages` in mkdocs.yml.
